It has become customary in the last few years at annual meetings to have talks that reflect
clarifications in our understanding of the Scriptures.
And this annual meeting is no exception.
We're going to have some solid spiritual food presented to us.
And so we're going to listen with pleasure as Brother Steve Lett develops an intriguing
theme when was the Babylonian exile?
Listen, how would you answer that question?
You probably would say that's an easy question.
The Babylonian exile went from 607 to 537 BCE and your answer would be correct.
In fact, we'd have to give you a gold star for that answer.
As Jehovah's prophets had warned, Jehovah punished the unfaithful Israelites with exile.
He sent them into a 70-year exile in Babylon.
But at the end of that exile period, what happened?
We'll open up to Isaiah chapter 52.
And let's notice that these words of Jehovah's prophet were fulfilled.
These words were said to those Israelites who were now being released.
Isaiah 52 verse 11, turn away, turn away, get out of there, touch nothing unclean.
Get out from the midst of her, keep yourselves clean, you who are carrying the utensils of Jehovah.
Yes, Jehovah's people were liberated from Babylon.
But now we ask this question, was this the only Babylonian exile?
Well, please go to Revelation chapter 18.
I'm very familiar scripture here, but you're going to notice there is a similar command to Jehovah's people.
As the one we read in Isaiah, notice Revelation 18 verse 4.
And I heard another voice out of heaven say, get out of her, my people.
If you do not want to share with her in her sins, and if you do not want to receive part of her plagues.
Now, the her is identified back in verse number two as being Bab in the great.
So clearly, the Apostle John writing in the first century CE was talking about a yet future Babylonian exile and liberation of Jehovah's people.
And this Babylonian exile would be much more far reaching than the one we talked about in the outset of our discussion.
Because Bab in the great is no mere Mesopotamian city.
It is no mere political world power.
In fact, Bab in the great has outlasted all of the seven political world powers combined,
at least from the time of Nimrod until today.
So what is this Babylon the great?
Well, as you know, it's the satanic world encompassing empire of false religion.
And the liberation of God's people from this Babylon and the restoration of true worship would even be better good news than the
liberation restoration that took place in 537 BCE.
But here's the million dollar question.
And you're going to find this truly fascinating when we discuss it.
When was this greater Babylonian exile?
What time period did it occupy?
Now, to get the answer to that, we're going to address four questions.
The first question, what have our publications taught on this subject until now?
The second question, why is there a need for an adjustment?
Number three, what's our new understanding?
And number four, how does this new understanding harmonize with other Bible prophecies?
Now, let's get that first question.
What have our publications taught until now?
Well, for many years, our publications have taught that the anointed were sent into exile
in Babylon the great during the troubled years of World War I.
At one point, we said the exile lasted from 1914 through 1918.
More recently, we have said, they went from the dark year 1918 to 1919.
But the governing body, and we really feel under the direction of Jehovah's spirit,
has recently undertaken a careful, prayerful study of this subject
and have come to the conclusion that an adjustment in our understanding is definitely needed.
But now, that brings us to the second question, why is there a need for an adjustment?
Why do we need to make an adjustment?
Well, here's the question that especially moved the governing body to come to that conclusion.
The question, did Jehovah really punish the anointed of the 1914 to 1919 era
with spiritual exile in Babylon the great?
Did he punish them this way?
Well, in regard to that, think again about the Babylonian exile we talked about at the beginning.
Why was it that Jehovah sent his people into exile in 607?
It was to punish a rebellious, a wicked people,
and it was only after Jehovah repeatedly gave warnings through his prophets
and they ignored those warnings that Jehovah sent them into exile.
But now, please think for a moment about our anointed brothers and sisters
during the World War I era.
Were they like that?
We could rebellious needing to be sent into exile.
Now, it's true.
They didn't have a clear understanding of Christian neutrality like we have today.
But they did the best they could with the understanding that they had.
For example, they knew that you should not bear arms and harm others.
So as conscientious objectors, many of them,
or if you used to have any share whatsoever in supporting the war effort,
others though lacking some understanding,
agreed to accept non-combatant roles.
A few were conscripted into the military,
and agreed to wear a uniform and carry a gun,
but they would not use that gun to harm anyone.
In an extreme situation where they had to shoot,
they would simply aim into the air.
On the home front, the Bible students were viciously persecuted,
arrested because of their denouncing Christmas role in the war.
Now does that sound like a rebellious wicked people needing to be sent into exile?
In fact, our brothers and sisters of that period as a whole,
courageously took a stand against war and violence,
no matter what the personal consequences were.
So it's hard for us to imagine that Jehovah would have sent them into exile.
I mean, what does Jeremiah 46 and verse 28 tell us about our wonderful God, Jehovah?
It says he always disciplines to the proper degree.
Furthermore, the evidence shows that Jehovah did not send the anointed off into Babylonian exile
during those years to the contrary during that time.
What were they doing?
They were actively separating themselves from Babylon the Great.
They were shedding false teachings,
and they were exposing false religion for being the frauds that they were.
Well, likely our discussion thus far has helped you to appreciate
why the governing body came to the conclusion that an adjustment
in our understanding is definitely needed.
Now it brings us to our third question,
what is our new understanding concerning the Babylonian exile?
Well, let us begin first by telling you straight forwardly
our new understanding as to when the Babylonian exile began.
It began not in 1914, not in 1918,
but sometime during the second century CE.
Now let's repeat that sometime during the second century CE.
But let's talk about why we say this.
If you recall in the first century CE,
Jesus and the apostles warned against the postates
and the corrupting influence that they could have on the Christian congregation.
For example, at Matthew 7, verse 15, Jesus said,
be on the watch for the false prophets who come to you and sheep's covering.
But inside they are ravenous wolves.
So he warned, didn't he?
Or what about the Apostle Paul, Acts 20, 29 and 30?
He said, I know that after my going away,
oppressive wolves will enter in among you,
will not treat the flock with tenderness,
and men will arise and speak twisted things
to draw away the disciples after themselves.
So he was warning, see, against the postates.
Or what about Jesus after he was resurrected?
He gave warnings to the seven congregations in Asia Minor
and included in the warnings, warnings against apostasy.
For example, to the Pergamum congregation.
In Revelation chapter 2, verses 14 through 16,
as an example, Jesus said,
I have a few things against you
that you have there those adhering to the teaching of Balum.
You also have those adhering to the teaching of the sect
of Nicolaius.
So repent if you do not, I am coming to you quickly.
And I will war against them with a long sword of my mouth.
See, very strong warnings.
But now the question is,
were these warnings of Jesus and the Apostles,
he did, sadly, no.
In fact, increasingly,
the elders became more and more tolerant of apostates.
What were the sad consequences
by the end of the first century CE apostasy
was becoming rampant in the congregation.
More and more men were slipping into the congregations
and turning the undeserved kindness of God into an excuse
for loose conduct or brazen conduct as we say now.
After the death of the last of the Apostles,
who were acting as a restraint, what happened?
Well, the situation got even worse, didn't it?
Much worse.
Imitation Christians now freely infiltrated
and just flourished in the congregation.
And as these imitation Christians promoted themselves
and compromised more and more with a secular authorities,
what happened?
And ugly, and I mean ugly baby was born.
That baby christened them.
And as that baby grew,
it became uglier and uglier in Jehovah's eyes.
Gradually becoming the most reprehensible part
of Babylon the Great.
So clearly it was then,
sometime in the second century CE,
that Christians were in effect taken off into exile
in Babylon the Great.
However, during those dark centuries that followed,
as we know there were always some fateful anointed Christians
who sought Jehovah and they tried to promote Bible truths
but Jehovah's time to end the long exile
was not here yet.
But now that brings us to the question,
when did this exile end?
We established when it began,
it began sometime in the second century CE.
But now when did it end?
Well, the answer, 1919,
when true Christians were fully completely freed
from false religion.
Let's talk about why we say that.
During the 1800s, it became clear
that Jehovah's time for release
and restoration of true worship was approaching.
The Bible students were proving themselves to be very fateful
and they were proving themselves to be in line for restoration.
They needed only a final refining.
And that took place from 1914 to 1918.
And that fulfilled Micah 4 verses one through three.
Remember what it says there?
It says in the final part of the days,
the mountain of the house of Jehovah would be raised
above the hills,
people would stream to Jehovah's house
and Jehovah would instruct them in his ways.
He would set matter straight
and they would beat their swords in the plowshares.
In fact, they wouldn't even learn more anymore.
Thus in 1919, with a release of prominent brothers
from prison, the time for full release
and restoration had finally arrived.
True Christians were at last and forever freed
from their long Babylonish exile.
But that brings us to our fourth and final question.
How does our new understanding harmonize
with other Bible prophecies?
Well, we'd just like to say this first
that when Jehovah refines our understanding
and he does this in his own time, his own way,
but when Jehovah does this, it's just simply amazing.
How that new understanding harmonizes
with the rest of the Bible, including Bible prophecies.
It's kind of like the pieces of a puzzle
of fitting together perfectly with each piece
confirming and clarifying the other piece.
So in this vein, we ask,
how does our new understanding harmonize
with azekious prophecy about the valley of dry bones?
Remember that prophecy in Ezeko chapter 37 versus 1 through 14?
If you recall, Ezekiel sees a valley
that is full of quote,
very dry bones, according to verse number two.
Later, Jehovah explains that this valley of dry bones
represents the whole house of Israel.
He tells Ezeko this in verse number 11,
but during the vision, Ezekiel, if you remember,
he sees the bones first begin to rattle.
And then the bones come together, bone to bone,
and then sin you and flesh and skin are added.
And then finally in verse 10,
they come to life, stand on their feet
and become an extremely large army.
Well, what was the first fulfillment of this prophecy?
That valley of dried up bones
pictured the dead condition of the Jewish exiles
in ancient Babylon.
But Jehovah did this seemingly impossible.
He revived them, didn't he?
And he made them again a living, powerful army.
But now, what is the greater fulfillment?
And that's what we're especially interested in.
We can now see that this valley of very dry bones
well pictures the Christian congregation
during the centuries-long exile
that we were talking about.
See, like very dry bones, it seemed to be completely dead,
spiritually dead, with no hope of ever reviving
but then what happened?
In a gradual way, faithful Christians
began to revive spiritually.
Long before the days of Brother Russell
and the Bible students, you could say there was a rattling sound
when a few brave Christians dared to translate the Bible
into the languages of the common people.
Then in the late 1800s,
as Brother Russell and his associates began
to expose false teachings and champion Bible truths,
it was as if bone was joining the bone.
Acquiring flesh, sin you and skin.
Finally, by 1919, faithful Christians were ready
to be raised up as an organized army of preachers.
So you can see from our little brief discussion here
that our new understanding harmonizes beautifully,
perfectly, with a zekios prophecy of the valley of dry bones.
But now we ask this question, how does our new understanding
harmonize with Jesus prophetic parable
about the wheat and the weeds in Matthew chapter 13?
If you recall, the master said it would be very hard
to distinguish between the wheat and the weeds.
So he told the reapers to wait until the end
of the long-growing season to separate the two.
We now understand that that long-growing season
is identical to the Babylonian exile.
During the centuries, though, of course,
they were always genuine Christians, genuine,
anointed Christians, but they were lost, weren't they?
They were indistinguishable from the imitation Christians
who surrounded them in golfing them, you could say, in captivity.
But after 1914, Christ followers were in the harvest season.
And when the harvest of the wheat got underway in 1919,
the distinction between the wheat and the weeds finally became clear.
And ever since 1919, the harvest work has prospered more and more abundantly.
Well, as we've now discussed, our new understanding certainly harmonizes
beautifully, perfectly, with Ezekiel's prophecy of the valley of the dry bones
and Jesus' prophetic parable about the wheat and the weeds.
So in conclusion, we say, is it not encouraging to think of Jehovah God
freeing faithful Christians from bondage to false religion
after more than 16 centuries of exile and how encouraging it is for us
to be part of Christ's organized army of preachers today?
And what a delight it is to be able to help the angels by staying busy in the preaching work,
helping still others to obey the command of Revelation 184
to get out of her, get out of Babin the Great, get out of false religion
so that they do not share in her eternal destruction.
Oh, we continue in the book of Ezekiel, and I think you'll find this next part very encouraging.
It's entitled One Nation in the Hand of Jehovah. And as you can see,
Mark Sanderson is going to deliver it. Unity, how marvelous it is to feel the unity in this room,
but dear brothers, the unity that we experience today as God's people is not the result of human efforts.
All the praise, all the glory, all the honor for what we experience on a day like this
must go to the Almighty God, Jehovah. And certainly, this unity has not come about by accident.
All of this was foretold in advance. And I'd like for you to open your Bibles with me, please.
And let's consider together a fascinating prophecy regarding this matter of unity.
It's in Ezekiel, chapter 37, and we're going to begin reading in verse 16,
and you, son of man, take a stick and write on it for Judah and for the people of Israel who are with him.
Then take another stick and write on it for Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and all the house of
Israel who are with him. Then bring them close to each other so that they become just one stick in
your hand. When your people say to you, will you not tell us what these things mean? Tell them,
this is what the sovereign Lord Jehovah says. I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand
of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel who are with him, and I will join them to the stick of Judah,
and I will make them one stick, and they will become one in my hand. The sticks that you write on
should be in your hand for them to see. Then tell them, this is what the sovereign Lord Jehovah says.
I will take the Israelites from among the nations where they have gone, and I will collect them
from every direction and bring them to their land. I will make them one nation in the land
on the mountains of Israel, and one king will rule over all of them, and they will no longer be two
nations, nor will they be divided any longer into two kingdoms. They will no longer defile themselves
with their disgusting idols, and their detestable practices in all their transgressions.
I will save them from all their unfaithfulness by which they have sined, and I will cleanse them.
They will be my people, and I myself will be their God. My servant David will be their king,
and they will all have one shepherd. They will walk in my judicial decisions, and carefully observe
my statutes. They will dwell on the land that I gave to my servant, to Jacob, where your forefathers
lived, and they will dwell on it forever. They and their children, and their children's children,
and David my servant will be their chieftain forever, and I will make a covenant of peace with them.
It will be an eternal covenant with them. I will establish them and make them many, and place my
sanctuary among them forever. My tent will be with them, and I will be their God, and they will be
my people, and the nations will have to know that I, Jehovah, am sanctifying Israel,
when my sanctuary is in their midst forever. Well, now, what is the meaning of this prophecy,
and how was it fulfilled? Well, first, let's consider what did Jehovah instruct Ezekiel to do?
Well, he told him to take two sticks, right on one for Judah, and on the other for Joseph,
the stick of Ephraim. Then Ezekiel was to bring the two sticks close together, so that they would
become just one stick. Well, now, what did these actions of the prophet Ezekiel illustrate?
Well, now, dear brothers, we have not considered these prophecies for a long time,
and so I'm going to have to ask you to put on your Bible history caps for a few minutes,
because we're going to go back over some of these things that we have not discussed for some years.
Now, you'll remember that after the death of King Solomon, Israel was divided.
Rehoboam became the king of the southern kingdom that was made up of two tribes with its capital in
Jerusalem. The Davidic kings, those in the line of Judah, ruled over those two tribes.
So, what did that stick of Judah represent? Well, yes, it represented those from the two tribe
kingdom of Judah. Jeroboam, on the other hand, became the first king of the northern ten tribe
kingdom of Israel. Well, now interestingly, what tribe did Jeroboam come from? He was from Ephraim,
the dominant tribe of the northern ten tribe kingdom. You'll also remember that Ephraim
was the son of Joseph. So, what did that stick for Joseph, the stick of Ephraim refer to?
Well, yes, it represented those who were from that northern ten tribe kingdom.
Well, now, what did Jerhova foretell with regard to these two different kingdoms? Well,
Jerhova said, he was going to unite those from the two tribe kingdom and those from the ten
tribe kingdom and they would become one in his hand. Well, now, brothers, why would many have
doubted that this prophecy could actually come to fulfillment? Well, by the time that Ezekiel
recorded this prophecy about the joining of the sticks, the people from the northern kingdom
had long ago been taken captive by the Assyrians. That had taken place in 740 BCE.
But then, in 607 BCE, the southern kingdom of Judah, and perhaps any ones who were left over
in the land from the northern kingdom had all been taken into exile by the Babylonians.
Well, from a human standpoint, it seemed impossible that Jerhova would be able to unify all of these
exiles into one nation. But what actually happened in the year 537 BCE? Well, let's open our
Bibles and let's look at 1 Chronicles chapter 9 in 1 Chronicles chapter 9 and verse 2.
Speaking here about those who were returning, it says the first inhabitants to return to their
possession in their cities were some Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and the temple servants,
and some of the descendants of Judah, of Benjamin, of Ephraim, and of Manasseh settled in Jerusalem.
Well, just as Jerhova had foretold representatives of both the two tribes, southern kingdom,
and of that northern 10 tribe kingdom did return, and they were joined together in one nation.
Just as Jerhova had said, it would happen. One now, brothers, that's all very interesting.
But I know that's not what you're wondering about. What is the modern day fulfillment?
How have these words been fulfilled in our time? Well, let's go back and look at Ezekiel chapter 37
again, and let's look at verse 24. It says, my servant David will be their king, and they will all
have one shepherd. They will walk in my judicial decisions and carefully observe my statutes.
Well now, how would this be fulfilled? Well, who is this servant David that's referred to in
verse 24? Of course, this is talking about Jesus Christ and the time when he would begin to rule
in 1914. And so the prophecy began to be fulfilled, especially from the year 1919. Why do we say that?
Well, by that time, Jerhova's servants had been set free from Babylonish captivity,
and now this prophecy regarding the two sticks would begin to be fulfilled.
Well, now what did the stick of Judah refer to in our modern day? What did it represent?
Well, now let's think together. Jerusalem was located in Judah. What was the city known for?
Well, of course, it was the city where the kings in the line of David ruled. But now what else was
there in Jerusalem? Of course, it was Jehovah's Temple, where the Levitical priests carried out their
priestly duties. So now we have kings, we have priests. Now what does that bring to your mind?
Well, of course, that stick for Judah referred to the anointed ones, those who had the hope
of reigning as kings with Christ Jesus and as serving as priests in the heavens.
Well, now after Jehovah had brought together his anointed ones, he had cleansed them,
he had reorganized them. They had been completely set free from Babylonish captivity.
Jehovah brought these anointed ones into complete unity of worship. But now brothers,
does the prophecy end there? What had Jehovah foretold in the book of Zechariah, chapter 8?
Now let's go in our Bibles and read this together. Zechariah, chapter 8, and verse 23,
this is what Jehovah of army says. In those days, 10 men out of all the languages of the nations
will take hold. Yes, they will take firmhold of the, aren't you glad that skirts gone?
They will take firmhold of the robe of a Jew saying, we want to go with you, for we have heard that
God is with you people. Well, now, how were these words to be fulfilled?
Men and women from all the nations were going to come forward and they were going to associate
themselves with the anointed remnant. And this would begin to appear after that time in 1919.
Well, what do the facts demonstrate? The October 15, 1923 watchtower drew attention to a group who
did not have the heavenly hope and who would live on earth during the time of Christ reign.
Then in 1932, the watchtower discussed a class of people in modern times who Jehovah would take
through Armageddon to live here on the earth. But it was in 1935 that there was a brilliant
flash of light. At the convention in Washington, DC, the great multitude was identified not as a
secondary heavenly class, but as an earthly class. Well, when the speaker, brother J.F.
Rutherford said to the audience, will all those who have the hope of living forever on the earth
please stare more than half of the audience rose to their feet. Brother Rutherford said,
behold the great multitude. What an exciting moment that must have been for those brothers.
Well, now, how do these with the earthly hope fit in with this prophecy regarding the two sticks?
Well, keep in mind, the Northern Kingdom had no Davidic kings. It had no Levitical priests.
Therefore, brothers, we can now say with confidence that the stick of Joseph in our modern day
represents the other sheep with an earthly hope. Jehovah has taken these two groups. His
anointed servants and his precious other sheep. And he has brought them together within his
almighty hand. They are no longer two sticks, but one stick, one nation in the hand of Jehovah.
Now, brothers, I'm not going to do what brother Rutherford did. I'm not going to ask you all to
stand. But I would like for you to take a moment and look around this room. Behold one stick, one nation
in the hand of Jehovah. Well, now, how does this understanding of Ezekiel's prophecy harmonize
with other Bible prophecies? Well, right away, our mind goes to John chapter 10 and verse 16.
What did Jesus say there? And I have other sheep, which are not of this fold. Those two I must bring
and they will listen to my voice and they will become one flock, one shepherd, just as the prophecy
had stated in Ezekiel. But that's not all brothers. We also have to consider what was mentioned in
verses 26 and verses 27 of Ezekiel chapter 37. You see there in verse 26, it says,
and I will make a covenant of peace with them. It will be an eternal covenant with them.
I will establish them and will make them many and place my sanctuary among them forever.
My tent will be with them and I will be their God and they will be my people. Well, of course,
where do our minds go? Right away to the words that were recorded some 700 years later in the book
of Revelation chapter 7 when almost the same wording is used about Jehovah spreading his tent over
them. But now there is one more place where we can see this harmony because a similar description
of unity is found in Jesus illustrations that become a part of the sign of His presence.
After referring to the faithful slave, Jesus gave two illustrations that apply primarily to those
with a heavenly hope. But then, he foretold that those with an earthly hope would loyally support
the anointed ones sticking closely to them. As a result, today what do we see? Well, the anointed
and the other sheep are working together unitedly as one nation in carrying out the disciple making
and preaching work that Jesus himself began. So, in the modern day fulfillment of Ezekiel's prophecy,
what has Jehovah accomplished? First, he gathered together his anointed worshipers,
and later he brought together a great crowd of his other sheep into the fold.
And now they are serving unitedly as one nation. How much brothers, this deepens our trust
in Jehovah's protection. Satan the devil would love to destroy this beautiful unity that we have.
But by Jehovah's undeserved kindness, he is not able to do so because where is this nation
safely within his protective hand? Yes, brothers, unity. How precious it is. But remember,
this unity that we enjoy today is not the result of any human efforts. It is Jehovah that has brought
us together. It is Jehovah who has made us one. And it is no accident. The prophecy of Ezekiel 37
shows that it is only by the direct action of God that this unity exists. Truly, brothers,
may we never allow anything divisive to take away or to disturb our unity. But rather, may we treasure
our place in this one nation in the hand of our magnificent God, Jehovah.
Our final talk of the day is also on the book of Ezekiel. And it's going to be delivered by
Brother Jeff Jackson. His theme is, have you been marked for survival? Do you think you know the answer?
Think again, Brother Jackson. How would you answer that question? Have you received the mark?
Perhaps this morning you were more concerned about, do you have your lapel card on so that you
could gain entry to the auditorium? But when we think about the book of Ezekiel in chapter 9,
of course, immediately we start to think about the mark for survival that was given.
What is the meaning of this mark? Have God's people already received the mark for survival?
Well, further consideration of this prophetic word has helped us to see that there is a need
for an adjustment. Faithful Christians today have not yet received that mark. Well, of course,
that brings many questions to mind. First of all, what did Ezekiel see in chapter 9? How was
it fulfilled in his day? And more importantly for us, what does it mean for us today?
So could I suggest that we turn to the book of Ezekiel together? Ezekiel chapter 9,
and we're going to read together the whole chapter from verse 1, right through to verse 11.
Before we do that, let's just have in mind the time frame, 612 BCE, just a few years before
Jerusalem was to be destroyed. By the time Ezekiel received this prophecy, he'd already seen the
disgusting, the detestable things that were happening right in Jehovah's temple in Jerusalem.
He realized from the message that it was given him that there was no return for them as far as
the spiritual decay and decadence had gone. Jerusalem was to be destroyed. The temple was to be destroyed.
Now, if we were Ezekiel at that time, what question would we have asked? Will anyone survive?
Well, let's turn our attention now to Ezekiel chapter 9, verses 1 through 11.
He then called out in my ears with a loud voice saying, some and those who will bring punishment
on the city, each one with his weapon for destruction in his hand. I saw six men coming from the
direction of the upper gate that faces north, each with his weapon for smashing in his hand,
and there was one man among them clothed in linen with a secretary's ink horn at his waist,
and they came in and stood beside the copper altar. Then the glory of the God of Israel rose from
where it had rested above the cherubs and moved to the threshold of the doorway of the house,
and he began calling out to the man who was clothed in linen at whose waist was the secretary's ink horn.
Jehovah said to him, go through the city, through Jerusalem, and put a mark on the farads of the
men who are sighing and groaning over all the detestable things that are being done in the city.
And to the others, he said in my hearing, go through the city after him and strike. Do not let your
eye feel sorry. Do not feel any compassion. Old man, young man, virgin, little child and women,
you should kill off completely. But do not go near to any man on whom there is the mark. You should
start from my sanctuary. So they started with the elders who were in front of the house. Then he said
to them, the file the house and filled the courtyards with the slain, go. So they went out and struck down
people in the city. While he was striking them down, I alone was left and I fell face down and
cried out, Alas, so sovereign Lord Jehovah, are you going to destroy all the remaining ones of Israel
while you pour out your rage on Jerusalem? So he said to me, the error of the house of Israel and
Judah is very, very great. The land is filled with bloodshed and the city is full of corruption.
For they say, Jehovah has left the land and Jehovah is not seen. But as for me, my eye will not
feel sorry, nor will I show compassion, the consequences of their way, I will bring down on their
own head. Then I saw the man clothes in linen with the incarnate his waist, bringing back words saying,
I have done just as you have commanded me. What a powerful message. Let's analyze just for a few
moments the various elements in this particular chapter. First of all, we have seven men, don't we?
Six men with smashing weapons. The seventh man has a secretary's ink horn. Now we don't normally
use ink horn these days, do we? I have an ink horn here and just for those who are very enthusiastic,
it is not a new release. We're not even releasing a barcode scanner that shows you the difference
between sheep and goats. Now this is just to give us some idea what an ink horn was in ancient times.
I'm sorry, I couldn't afford one from the time of Ezekiel, but this one is from the Middle East.
So basically in Ezekiel's day, perhaps it was made of wood. There would be some reeds there and
then a little container within. So this secretary or this man would go and then put the mark on the
fabric. So that's what we're talking about. That this man with the secretary's ink horn would go
and put a mark on those who were sighing and groaning. And the six men, well as it mentions here,
they would destroy all those that did not have the mark. Well how was this prophecy fulfilled
in Ezekiel's time? Obviously in the year 607 BCE, there was a destruction of the apostates that
lived in Jerusalem at that time. In fact, the Babylonian armies were spoken of as a cup in the hand
of Jehovah to discipline those who had turned their backs on Jehovah. But this is the question
that we need to ask ourselves. Was the destruction indiscriminate? No, it wasn't.
Jehovah never sweeps away the righteous together with the wicked. When we look at other
scriptures, particularly the book of Jeremiah, we see that the Reckobites, Ebed Melek, Jeremiah,
Embaric all survived. These ones had showed faithfulness before the time of destruction.
And clearly, they at one point were marked for survival and survived they did.
But how were these ones marked for survival? Well, we are not told that Ezekiel took something
like this and went through the city marking persons as to whether they would survive or not.
What is described here in Ezekiel chapter 9 is what happened in the invisible realm behind the
scenes. Yes, Jehovah's representatives, the angels, the angelic forces were very much involved
with isolating and finding those who would be marked for survival.
Well, what does this mean for us today? First of all, let's review what we currently believe.
For many of us, we haven't discussed this subject for quite a while. You don't have to remember
this part of the talk though, believe me. Well, up until recently, publications have explained
that the man dressed in linen with the second freezing corn represented the anointed remnant
who spearhead the preaching work. And in a symbolic way, as they preach the message,
people, due to their accepting the message, could be marked for survival.
What is the mark? Well, we've explained that it's the evidence a person produces to show that
dedicated baptized Christians who have put on the Christlike personality. And who are the ones marked?
Well, again, the watchtower has soaked us to see a great crowd would be marked. And these ones then
would join the anointed remnant in this so-called marking work.
Well, why would we need to change that? As we look at the scriptures as a whole,
and we compare what Ezekiel saw with what Jesus tells us about the great tribulation,
particularly with the judgment of the sheep and goats. We have to see, as Brother Leth mentioned,
how everything fits in. So when we think about the power below the illustration of the sheep and
goats, who does the judging work, who decides whether someone is a sheep or a goat?
It's Jesus Christ, isn't it? So we understand then that Jesus is the one who makes this determination.
Additionally, looking at our adjusted understanding of the power of the sheep and goats,
we realize the timeframe, not now, but during the great tribulation. So this helps us to understand
how chapter 9 of Ezekiel should be applied. And looking back there again,
we know in recent years we've been careful not to try and make types and anti-types
of every aspect of what the Bible says. For example, if we go back to Ezekiel chapter 9 verse 2,
how easy it would be for us to become sidetracked with the upper gate? What does that mean?
If Jesus north, not south, then they stood beside the copper altar, which side? Front back,
beside that side? It doesn't matter. The main thing is for us to realize Ezekiel saw something
that was fulfilled in his day. Jesus tells us that something similar is facing us in the future.
So the main thing we need to ask is what lessons do we learn from this particular passage of
Scripture? And we could say there are five lessons that we'll quickly go through.
The first lesson is that Jehovah always warns people before destruction comes.
We know in the time of back in 607 prior to that time, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah, Daniel,
they were all inspired to utter prophecies to warn persons. Well, today is a similar arrangement.
We know there's a small group of anointed ones that are taking the lead in feeding and warning
God's people, and this message is going out worldwide. The second lesson,
Jehovah's people today do not mark those who will survive. Just the same as in Ezekiel's time,
Ezekiel didn't go through and mark who would receive that mark for survival. Rather, our responsibility
is to convey the warning message and help others to come into a good relationship with Jehovah.
The third lesson. To survive this upcoming destruction, individuals need to prove now
their faith in Jehovah. So what are some of the things that we could say are similar?
Today, people need to sign, groan over the detestable things that are happening.
They need to react favorably to the preaching work. They should logically follow the command
to get baptized in symbol of their dedication. Yes, they need to put on the Christlike personality
and actively support Christ's brothers. All of this needs to be done prior to the outbreak of
the Great Tribulation. The fourth lesson. Behind the scenes, the heavenly armies we might say will
be involved with marking who will be deserving of survival. Jesus Christ and the angels will in
effect be putting marks on the farts of those who will survive. So the great crowd will be marked
as sheep shortly before the outbreak of Armageddon. The fifth lesson. Jesus Christ and his
heavenly armies along together with the 144,000 will destroy the nations that oppose Jehovah
and his King Jesus Christ. So those are the five lessons that we see as parallels here.
First of all, Jehovah always gives a warning. Secondly, we don't actually do the marking work
ourselves. The third point to survive this coming Great Tribulation people need to act now.
The fourth point behind the scenes, Jesus and the angels will determine just prior to Armageddon
who really are sheep. And then finally, the destruction of all wickedness when this earth will be
cleansed. Well, how do we feel about this understanding? Truly, it's exciting, isn't it? It builds
out trust in Jehovah because we know that Jehovah has an arrangement in place whereby the righteous
will not be destroyed with the wicked. As we face the Great Tribulation, we can do so in confidence
knowing that Jehovah and Jesus will select those who truly should survive the Great Tribulation.
But at the same time, doesn't it help us to see the importance of the preaching work that we're
doing now? People need to hear the message. Yes, we need to preach this message, this message
of warning, so that when the Great Tribulation does break out, then those that are faithful will
receive that mark of survival. So brothers and sisters, what does that mean for us? What do we need?
We don't need one of these. We don't need a bar code scanner. What we need is to fulfill the
commission that Jehovah and Jesus have given us. Continue to preach the message. Help new ones to
learn about Jehovah. Yes, help them to take their stand on the right side and then prior to
Amageddon, they will receive the mark for survival. Well, what do you think? Was it worthwhile
attending this annual meeting today? We thanked Jehovah for all of the spiritual food that he
has provided. And in our prayers, I'm sure that we will all remember him and remember that he
is the giver of every good gift and perfect present. All credit, all praise goes to him.
We're going to have an opportunity to praise Jehovah now in song and we're going to follow the same
routine. We're going to sing song number 144. Song number 144, a very cheerful song. It means
their life.